feat: move astro config validation after astro:config:setup (#13482)
withastro/astro: .changeset/easy-vans-laugh.md

---

> 'astro': minor

Reviewer: How confident are we there will be no integrations impacted in a breaking way so this is safe in a minor release? Would we revert if people report this broke their projects?

Reviewer 2: Try to look at it the other way around: if there are integrations that create invalid configurations it will result in a buggy functionality, and that bug isn't caught by Astro now. The integration needs to fix it.

This means that there's a bug nonetheless. With this, the bug is caught by the users every time, and reported to integration developers.

Author: And now there's a log showing what integration is failing to match the validation so it's easier for users to report

Reviewer: Yeah, more thinking of the scenario where being able to set some technically “invalid” config ended up being useful for someone. But as long as we’re confident this shouldn’t happen/are prepared to handle reports of it happening that sounds fine to me.

---

> Updates when the configuration is validated to include integrations

Reviewer 3: Is this of interest/importance only to integration authors? If so, it's probably helpful to make that clear so that "regular users" with an Astro project aren't wondering whether this affects them. Like, is it something like:

```suggestion
Updates Astro config schemas and the Integrations API lifecycle hooks that determine when the configuration is validated. Also adds error logging specifying which integration/hook is failing validation.
```

or something like this that can be more explicit about this affecting integration authoring? (assuming that's the case!)

Author: ```suggestion
Updates Astro config validation to also run for integrations. An error log will specify what integration is failing the validation
```
Wdyt?

Reviewer 3: I think that's good! But it still is unclear whether I should care if I'm a *user* of integration, or an *author* of integrations. (That's why I had mentioned the Adapter API originally, figuring that people who don't use that would know that they can tune out, if that's the case.) That's kind of my main thing with both these comments, that *everyone* will read these messages and it needs to be clear who they are for! Most people have *installed* integrations, so just knowing something is "about integrations" isn't enough to make it clear.

Author: Updated!

Reviewer 3: Looks great, thank you!

> From now on, Astro will validate the configuration before and after each integration `astro:config:setup` hook have run. This means `updateConfig()` calls will no longer accept invalid configuration.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now, Astro will validate the configuration both before and after each integration `astro:config:setup` hook has run.  means `updateConfig()` calls will no longer accept invalid configuration.

This fixes a situation where integrations could potential update a project with a malformed configuration. These issues should now be caught and logged so that you can update your integration to only set valid configurations.
```
I'm wondering whether something like this second sentence addresses Chris's review comment that maybe this feels like a breaking change to integration authors? (Note, I've written that from the perspective of integration authors seeing these errors. If instead it's the people who have installed the integrations that are seeing the errors, then instead of "so you can **update your integration** to work properly", it's instead "so you can see which integrations may be causing errors in your project.")

Author: ```suggestion
Now, Astro will first validate the the user configuration, then validate the config after each integration `astro:config:setup` hook has run. This means `updateConfig()` calls will no longer accept invalid configuration.

This fixes a situation where integrations could potentially update a project with a malformed configuration. These issues should now be caught and logged so that you can update your integration to only set valid configurations.
```
Wdyt?

Reviewer 3: Just checking, is the first "the user config" and then the second "the Astro config"? It might be best to be explicit about what the second thing is, but yes! I think this would be great!

Author: ```suggestion
Now, Astro will first validate the user configuration, then validate the updated configuration after each integration `astro:config:setup` hook has run. This means `updateConfig()` calls will no longer accept invalid configuration.

This fixes a situation where integrations could potentially update a project with a malformed configuration. These issues should now be caught and logged so that you can update your integration to only set valid configurations.
```
OR
```suggestion
Now, Astro will first validate the user configuration, then after each integration `astro:config:setup` hook has run to handle configuration updates through `updateConfig()`. This means `updateConfig()` calls will no longer accept invalid configuration.

This fixes a situation where integrations could potentially update a project with a malformed configuration. These issues should now be caught and logged so that you can update your integration to only set valid configurations.
```

Reviewer 3: I like the first one!

---
'astro': minor
---

> Updates Astro config validation to also run for the Integration API. An error log will specify what integration is failing the validation

Reviewer 3: I wasn't fast enough! 😄
